           15 years of the ISS
                            64
www.spaceanswers.com
 064-069_AAS_018_ISS DP REVISED.indd 64
01/10/2013 19:59
                                                              
           15 years of the ISS
       15 ISS
 years of the
          As the most expensive and ambitious structure ever assembled, the
International Space Station has been an unequivocal success in its continuing
 mission to impart a wealth of knowledge upon all humankind
   Fifteen years ago on 20 November 1998, a
Russian Proton rocket lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Its payload was a single module called Zarya (Sunrise), funded by the US and built by Russia, that would serve as the first component of a global venture the likes of which had never been seen before.
Just over two weeks later, on 6 December 1998, Space Shuttle Endeavour – flying on the STS-88 mission – took the US-built Unity module into space and berthed it with Zarya. With the connection of these two inaugural modules, construction on the International Space Station (ISS) had begun.
The ISS is perhaps the greatest example of what can be achieved through international co-operation. With a cost estimated at around $100 billion (£63 billion) – the most expensive man-made structure ever assembled – the logistics and planning of building and operating a space station of this size have been stupendous. Today, many members of the public take the ISS for granted, with astronauts and cargo regularly making their way to and from the station 420 kilometres (260 miles) above the Earth seemingly with ease, but the construction and operation of this technological marvel have been anything but easy.
www.spaceanswers.com
Written by Jonathan O’Callaghan
“We’ve learned a lot since that first module,” says John Shannon, the ISS programme manager for Boeing. He was the launch flight controller
for NASA when Endeavour undertook that fateful mission in 1998. Having worked at NASA for
25 years before joining Boeing earlier this year, Shannon oversaw the development and growth of the ISS into the marvel we know it to be today.
“I think the really tough part to me of learning how to build this enormous structure in space
was that it had to be a viable spacecraft the whole time,” says Shannon. “It wasn’t just like a ship
you can build in dry dock and launch when it’s all finished up; we had to really think through how all the systems would work as we were building it out in the most hazardous environment that people can operate in.”
Building the ISS has not only been a technical challenge, but a political and logistical one as
well. The station was borne out of the cancelled American Space Station Freedom and Russian Mir-2 programmes, with those two projects merging, along with commitments from other international partners including Japan and Europe, into the space station in operation today.
Space Station Freedom was first proposed in the early Eighties, but cost overruns and budget cuts saw the programme continually delayed. In June 1993, a crucial vote in the House of Representatives saw an attempt to scrap the programme fail by
a one-vote margin (215-216). Had the programme been abandoned, it is likely the ISS as we know
it would not have been built, as many of the components from Freedom have been incorporated into its design.
Another pivotal moment in the development of the ISS was the decision by the Clinton administration in September 1993 to partner with
    “Now we’re really into the utilisation
 and we’re starting to see this eye-
watering breadth of activity”
John Shannon
 65
 064-069_AAS_018_ISS DP REVISED.indd 65
01/10/2013 19:59
                                                               
    15 years of the ISS
       Russia in the station’s construction. NASA was finding the prospect of building a station of the scope and size of the International Space Station to be a daunting prospect, both financially and technically. Russia’s involvement would prove vital; they could supply several of the modules needed for a fully operating station, as well as the Soyuz and Progress spacecraft needed to take crew and cargo into orbit.
”That was a very difficult and intense time, to see how the two primary countries [the US and Russia] could work together with the other [international] partners to build the station,” explains Shannon. “But once we launched the first elements in 1998 we had a really good idea of what the overall plan was going to be.”
The plan for the ISS was ambitious, to say the least. While it was preceded by a number of space stations, namely America’s Skylab and Russia’s Mir and Salyut stations, none of those could compare in size and complexity to the ISS. Here was a station that would be as big as an American football field upon its completion and weigh more than 320 cars on Earth, while also providing a habitable environment in which astronauts could live.
Soyuz spacecraft could take crews to the ISS, but it was the Space Shuttle that would be the key to building it; the robotic arm on board the Space Shuttle was needed to berth various modules together. However, the
Space Shuttle Columbia disaster on
1 February 2003 led to the station’s construction being put on hold while the Space Shuttle programme was grounded for two and a half years due to safety concerns.
Aside from that period, construction of the ISS has continued unabated
to the point that many now regard
the station to be complete and fully operational, although some further modules are planned. The ISS has now been continuously manned for
a record of over 4,600 days since 2 November 2000 when Expedition
1 began, the first long-duration crew to reside on the ISS, surpassing the previous record of almost ten years (3,634 days) held by Mir.
“The building was the first big thing,” explains Shannon, “and now we’re really into the utilisation and we’re starting to see this eye-watering breadth of activity.” Since its inception the ISS has had numerous goals, but it has focused around three main areas. The first is research that could improve life on Earth. Hundreds
66
    064-069_AAS_018_ISS DP REVISED.indd 66
                                1. This photo from STS-88 in December 1998 shows the ISS in its infancy with just the Zarya and Unity modules assembled.
2. The arrival of the three-
man crew of Expedition 1 on 2 November 2000 began a period of uninterrupted human occupation of the ISS that continues to this day.
3. Expedition 20, which docked on 29 May 2009, marked the first time a six-person crew had inhabited the space station.
4. Canadarm2, seen here with astronaut Stephen Robinson in August 2005, has played a key role in the assembly and maintenance of the ISS since it was attached in April 2001.
5. The Cupola module opened
its shutters on 17 February 2010, affording ISS crewmembers gorgeous vistas of Earth and space.
6. The ISS, seen here in March
2011, is now effectively complete,
although there are plans to install
new modules and components in 01 the future.
06
    www.spaceanswers.com
 01/10/2013 19:59
                          
     15 years of the ISS
        02
      064-069_AAS_018_ISS DP REVISED.indd 67
03
04
   www.spaceanswers.com
67
05
01/10/2013 20:00
                                                               
       15 years of the ISS
Take a tour around the ISS
Zarya
The inaugural module of the ISS, the Zarya module was used as the hub of the station early in its lifetime, providing power and communications among other things, but is now used mostly for storage and propulsion.
           Solar array
The huge solar array of the ISS uses solar cells to convert sunlight to electricity and provide power for the station.
Thermal radiators
Large radiators are used to dissipate heat away from the ISS that is generated during the collection of sunlight on the solar array.
            Columbus This European-built research laboratory supports scientific and technological research in a microgravity environment, including things such as fluid physics and materials science.
       CAM
An interesting addition
to the station would
have been the Centrifuge Accommodations Module (CAM), providing artificial gravity for specimens, but it was cancelled in 2005.
Destiny
This laboratory module is the primary research module for the US, with a wide range of experiments on board the bus-sized module.
        Space Shuttle Although it’s no longer
in operation, the Space Shuttle was integral in the construction of the ISS.
Harmony
Often called the ‘utility hub’ of the ISS, Harmony (or Node 2) has six ports and links Columbus, Kibo and several docking ports.
Kibo
The most spacious module on the station is Japan’s Kibo experiment module, where up to four astronauts can simultaneously carry out experimental activities.
       68
www.spaceanswers.com
064-069_AAS_018_ISS DP REVISED.indd 68
01/10/2013 20:00
                                                               
     15 years of the ISS
        “It’s the greatest technological
achievement that humans
have gotten to at this point”
Tom Marshburn
of experiments are running on the ISS at any one time, and many of these have direct connotations for counterparts on Earth. This includes medical research, physical sciences, curing diseases and developing new materials. Through this goal alone the ISS has more than proved its worth.
The ISS has also been hugely important in terms of the future of space exploration. “With the Shuttle we were limited to two weeks [in space],” says Shannon. “[On the ISS] we’ve seen physiological changes in bones and eyes, pressure on your spinal cord, and a lot of different things that we never would have known if we were just doing two-week flights on the Shuttle. If we would have set off to go to an asteroid or Mars for months-long missions they could have debilitated the crew such that they couldn’t have accomplished their mission, or they could have come to great harm, so the ISS is this wonderful safe test bed where you can experiment on crews so that when we do go beyond low Earth orbit we can do so much more safely.”
The third key use of the ISS is
to serve as a destination for a new generation of spacecraft designed
by both national and private space agencies. Throughout its lifetime it has welcomed the Space Shuttle, Russia’s Soyuz and Progress, the Japanese HTV (H-II Transfer Vehicle), the European ATV (Automated Transfer Vehicle) and, most recently, SpaceX’s Dragon capsule. The newest visitor is set to be the Cygnus spacecraft, built by Orbital Sciences, which is competing with SpaceX for commercial cargo contracts from NASA. And the visitors don’t
stop there; in the future Boeing aims to send its manned CST-100 capsule
to the station, while Sierra Nevada Corporation wants its Dream Chaser spaceplane to dock with the ISS.
Life on the station “is spectacular, in a word,” according to NASA astronaut Tom Marshburn, who was part of the Expedition 34/35 crew that included Canadian astronaut Chris Hadfield and stayed aboard the ISS from 21 December 2012 to 13 May 2013. For those astronauts that live aboard the ISS, the constantly visiting spacecraft
are just one aspect of the exciting jobs they enjoy. “I don’t think it’s overstating it to say it’s the greatest technological achievement that humans have gotten to at this point,” Marshburn tells All About Space.
For Marshburn life on the ISS
was both “exhausting and exciting,” with their intense mission schedules countered with their ability to
see gorgeous views of the Earth
from a vantage point enjoyed only
by a few hundred people. “I was constantly astounded by what human beings from around the world had accomplished,” said Marshburn. “It really hits you when you get there and when you think of almost two acres of technology going 28,000 kilometres (17,500 miles) per hour and we’re living in the middle of it. It’s just a dream come true in a lot of ways.”
On board the ISS the astronauts have a lot of work to do. Although
the station experiences a sunrise
and sunset every 90 minutes as it orbits the Earth, the astronauts still structure their days like they would on Earth. They operate on GMT, waking in the morning before completing tasks throughout the day. These can range from station maintenance and experiments to, on rare occasions, extravehicular activities (EVAs, or spacewalks) outside the station. They are afforded some ‘downtime’ to
relax, which many astronauts like to make use of by heading to the Cupola module and staring at the Earth or taking pictures, before heading to
bed at night in their telephone booth- sized private quarters. Every day they must also do two and a half hours of exercise to ensure their body survives the adverse effects of living in a microgravity environment, such as the decreased bone mass that can occur.
The International Space Station itself is big, with a typical size estimate comparing it to an elongated five- bedroom house, so when astronauts first arrive at the station it can feel
like a bit of a maze. “You’re like a deer in the headlights, definitely on your first day,” explains Marshburn. “After the third or fourth month, that’s when you realise you’re a part of the station, that it’s almost another crewmember.
You know its intricacies, its sounds, and the certain feel it has about it. It develops a personality.”
Despite the incredible complexity of the station, Marshburn says that the most difficult things to do in space are things we take for granted here
on Earth. “The easy things down here are the most difficult things up there,” he says. For example, “you’ll lose any little thing you put down that you haven’t already figured out a way to restrain. One thing you figure out in space is that if you’re only going to put something down for just a moment you can float it, just let go of it, and come back ten seconds later and it’ll still be there.”
These simple quirks of spaceflight as well as grand experiments like the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, which is hunting for signs of dark matter,
are a testament to just how much
the ISS has benefitted mankind, and there’s still much to learn. While
the operating lifetime of the ISS is currently under discussion, with the preference being to keep the station running until 2028, those involved with the space station are anxious
to keep it going as long as possible. Ultimately there will come a time when we no longer have the means or will to maintain the station, but until then there is plenty more to do.
“Fifteen years from now we’ll be thinking about [de-orbiting the ISS],” says Shannon. By then, our knowledge of space exploration will be such
that we can safely and effectively expand our sphere of influence in space, and we will have performed groundbreaking science along the
way in experiments that couldn’t be replicated on Earth.
When the time eventually comes to bring the curtain down on mankind’s greatest endeavour yet, we will have kept a continuous presence in space for almost three decades. By that time, we will well and truly be ready to explore new frontiers. “We will have learned what we need to learn about people’s reaction to space so that we can go farther and deeper into space,” concludes Shannon. “I think that’s going to be the legacy of the International Space Station.”
69
       064-069_AAS_018_ISS DP REVISED.indd 69
01/10/2013
20:00
                                            SPP
The Science Power Platform (SPP) was a cancelled addition to the Russian segment of the station that would have supplied additional power.
Zvezda
The Zvezda module is the heart of the Russian segment, providing living quarters, life support, power distribution and more.
         ATV
Zvezda serves as the docking port for ESA’s cargo spacecraft, the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV).
Unity
The US and Russian segments of the station are connected by the six ports of Unity, or Node 1, the first US-built element of the ISS. The international crew will often share meals here.
     www.spaceanswers.com
     © NASA; Sol 90 Images
    
